Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture on bubble sort and the actual learn how the bubble sort algorithm
works.
And we'll also see some paralyzation of it after this lecture will implement bubble sort in Python.
So it's getting to get started.
So as I mentioned we'll have an explanation of visualization and afterwards in implementation.
All on bubble sort.
So the bubble sort.
How it works is it makes multiple passes through that list.
It then compares adjacent items and exchanges those that are out of order.
So each pass through the list places the next largest value in its proper place.
And in essence each item bubbles up to the location where it belongs.
That's how this algorithm gets its name.
So let's go ahead and see a quick figure that explains this.
So here we're looking at is just the drawing of a first pass of a bubble sort.
So the shaded items and you can see him here kind of along at the Agnel are the ones being compared
to see if they're out of order.
So if we have a list of items then there's going to be.
And minus one pairs of items that need to be compared on the first pass.
And it is important to know that once the largest value in the list is part of a pair it will continually
be moved along until the pass is complete.
So we can take a look here and see that in comparing 54 versus 26.
There's an exchange it's 54 has greater than 26.
Now we move on to the next pier 54 versus 93 no exchange 93 is bigger than 54.
We keep going down and doing the exchanges as needed.
When we compare the two elements to check which one is greater than the other.
And then we do a swap.
So you can see certain elements are kind of bubbling to the top if they happen to be greater than the
other element that's being compared to.
So eventually 93 is in place the elements number 93 is in place after the first pass.
So at the start of the second pass the largest value is now in place there are any minus 1 items left
to sort.
Meaning that there will be a minus 2 pairs since each pass places the next largest value in place.
The total number of passes necessary will be and minus one.
Then after completing the end of minus one passes the smallest item must be in the correct position
with no further processing required.
All right.
So we're going to do now is go ahead and check out some visualisations.
So let's go ahead and jump to the notebook.
Were there some useful links for you to check out.
So if you go to the sorting and searching folder here I'm on and be viewer and you are the Python the
or under the Python for algorithms data structures in interviews there's a sorting and searching folder
and you can click on implementation of bubble sort.
Right here they'll take you to this notebook which also has a quick explanation.
But more importantly it has resources for review and an implementation that we're going to be looking
at in the next lecture.
But if you click on each of these resources you'll get the following.
You'll get a link to Wikipedia.
And Wikipedia has pretty nice resources wups for learning about the various sorting algorithms and it
also has little animations here free to check out performance information.
So I encourage you to check those out or look at the big cheat sheet from the Big O section of the Course
has an explanation.
Step by step examples she can see here.
A first pass example some are taught we just saw.
And then it also has pseudo code implementation.
The second link that you're going to see is from a Web site called visual algo dot net.
This is really one of the key resources for you to learn sorting really well.
So what it does is it has a list of sorting algorithms.
It also visualizes other algorithms which will get to later but it's really useful for visualizing sorting
algorithms.
So you can go in and click that link visual algo dot net slash sorting they'll take you to a page that
looks like this you'll get a little walk through it first and click next here you can do bubbles select
insert merge quick quick count and read x.
Sorting algorithms select the 20 you want to do.
And you can either create your own new list or you can define or let the computer generate a random
list and then to sort the elements you click sorts and then go and then you'll view the visualization
here.
And what's really nice about this and this is probably the best part is that as the action is being
carried out each steps described here in this little status panel and you can follow some pseudo code
here which traces the algorithm and the pseudocode looks really similar to what Python does.
And you can control the animation with the player controls here at the bottom.
All right so just to show you a quick run through the click here and click sort and click go.
And you'll notice it didn't run and that's because up here you have to click exploration mode.
So I was on tutorial mode.
Good unclick exploration mode then click go and you'll start to see the swaps taking place and you can
control the speed here or go back a step rewind etc..
So you have a status and it's going through the pseudo code here.
So that's really useful.
So I really encourage you to make the most of this resource.
This is probably the best way to learn them if you're a visual learner especially for sorting algorithms
.
Really the best way is to watch the animation a couple times really learn it well understand what's
happening and then implement the code yourself.
OK.
So I encourage you to check out this visual algo that net resource.
We're going to do now is paused this and check out the other links in the other one that's on that list
is W.W. that sorting dash algorithms dot com slash bubble soar.
It has all sorting algorithms and all kinds of initial conditions here.
It has an algorithm for you to follow basic pseudo code has the properties.
What kind of big.
Oh it has little discussion on it.
And for examples on different types the list so has random list nearly surrealists river reverse list
and a few unique lists.
So if you click on them they'll start going through the animation of being sorted.
So you can actually click on all these and you'll see how the algorithm is taking place visually.
OK.
Finally we have this bubble animation here using javascript and this is the one I'm going to use just
to quickly go over again what we're actually doing or performing a bubble sort.
So keep in mind that what we're going to do on the first pass is keep comparing and doing what are known
as sometimes swaps this exchange operation.
So between six and eights it's already bigger so we're not going to do a swap between 8 and 1 here.
We will do a swap 18:15 no swap.
So now we're comparing 15 and nine.
This is going to be a swap 15 and 20.
No.
No exchange here so we move on to 20.
So notice basically this in-between line is what we're moving down.
So we're going to be moving down this whole list on this first pass here.
And you can kind of go faster on your own or hold it down and notice the patterns here how eventually
towards the end of the list you're getting the sorted items so they're bubbling up to the top here.
And if you just hold this down you can see it in a little faster.
Okay.
So go in and check out those visualisations So you really understand what's actually happening here
.
But the basic idea of bubble sort is you're bubbling up throughout the list and doing exchanges along
the way so that eventually you've sort of the entire list in the next lecture to make this really clear
.
We're going to implement our own bubble sorting algorithm in Python.
All right guys I'll see you at the next lecture